Cardiff Carnival 25th Anniversary Project.
Interviewer Steve Fletcher.
Interviewee,
Alvaro Mondo Celestialo.
The location of the interview is the Swicker office
and the date today is the 5th of October 2015.
Ray, when do you recall first meeting me and Swicker Carnival?
My recollection of meeting you was 1990, 1991.
I can always remember going to Channelview in that little office
that you were sharing with...
Cardiff Arts Marketing, I think. Yes, yes.
That's when I first met you, was up in that little office.
That's smashing. I remember in early July 1990
being invited to a meeting by key movers and shakers in the Bute Town,
the Docks community, to decide whether or not, even at this late stage,
there should be a carnival, a Bute Town carnival for 1990.
And I was in a lucky position of being able to say,
in terms of a parade, Swicker can provide.
We had the first ever Cardiff Mars Carnival that year
and over half the participants, all of whom were aged 14 and under,
were from the Bute Town area.
And if there were to be a carnival, I remember Swicker offering
to remount at no cost to the Bute Town carnival the parade.
And as I recall, you were in that meeting, always a voice of positivity
and we can and the rest of it.
But of course the Bute Town carnival happened in 1990
and Swicker effectively provided the parade,
which led us to our cunning plan, wasn't it?
It was.
After you Ray, what was the cunning plan?
Well, the plan was to sort of broaden it, actually to broaden it,
and that's where Cardiff Bay Development Company came in,
which they were very, very helpful.
I must agree, you could agree on that,
because they did a wonderful job of funding.
Absolutely. So back in the day, of course, the docks of detail...
The 1990 carnival was not... it was good, it was very good actually,
but I think both you and both the carnival, the Bute Town carnival,
were based on the learning curve to try to improve it,
which was, it did improve, very much so, it did very much improve.
But then 1991, that was when Cardiff Bay,
it was Cardiff Bay Development Corporation's carnival.
Yes. So CBDC, as it was known, the acronym,
we were able to persuade them, so in 1991, two separate carnivals,
the Cardiff Maast carnival, run by Swickert,
and the Bute Town carnival, run by the Bute Town carnival committee,
and particularly, well you were in the chair, weren't you?
Yes, but I didn't have...
So you spent the whole time at the community centre and everything.
Yes, I was chairman at that particular time,
but I didn't have that much input into the carnival itself,
because the carnival committee itself was running it,
well it was running it, you know, so,
and they said both the Bute Town community centre,
carnival committee and Swickert sort of merged together,
which was, I was hoping that there would be a very good collaboration
between the two of us.
Yes.
But unfortunately, it didn't work out that way.
Well, I think what we can say to future generations is that in 1991,
effectively, Swickert was acting as producers for a joint carnival,
Swickert's always been keen to be open to everybody on a city-wide basis,
and of course, the remit of the Bute Town carnival was quite rightly
to celebrate the Docks community and its heritage and its future in particular,
but we were able to bridge those for one year,
and I was, you know, very much at the forefront of persuading CBDC
to invest in this new vision, a city-wide carnival,
but one based in and around Bute Town, so they were first among equals,
and CBDC came up with a funding line of £25,000,
which back in those days was reasonable,
I mean, there was certainly obviously a multi-billion pound operation,
to put it mildly, and in 1991, for one year only,
we were able to put both carnivals together
and effectively bring it off and produce the biggest and best.
Well, it wasn't the best at that particular time.
Absolutely, yes, in that era, of course,
because Bute Town Carnival has got a very different era.
Well, it over, and then after that, 1991,
then Bute Town Carnival committee sort of disappeared.
There was a slow, gradual decline,
and the two carnivals separated and went their separate ways, as it were.
Which was, I thought, at that particular time, which was wrong,
I didn't like the idea of the partnership parting.
No, looking back, I mean, we had a moment there,
and we certainly have shown that it could work.
I suppose if we could get back in time,
I think that's probably a decision both of us would like to change.
Yes, looking back in retrospect, yes, it would be fine.
Perhaps we wouldn't be in the position that we're in today.
No, precisely, you just can't say.
Obviously, you and your personal history is closely linked to the DOCS community,
and I wonder if you care to tell us a bit about,
and also obviously your roots in terms of Cape Verde.
Can you tell us a bit about your background?
Yes, both my parents were from Cape Verde.
My mother came over just before the end of the 1800s, 1890s.
She came over.
The people who brought my mother over from Cape Verde
was the Millers of Millers and Corry, the coal people.
Wow.
She lived in Bristol.
That's where they came, when they came back from Cape Verde.
They lived in Bath, Bristol.
Yes, yes.
But then she came into Cardiff because her friend,
who was also brought over by the, I don't say the Millers and Corry company,
but the persons who worked for them, which was the, the family name was Rice.
And they brought her over, and she had a shop in Angelina Street.
It's called Mrs. Lopes, and it was renowned for the parrot that was hanging out there.
She kept in the shop, you know, and everybody knows Mrs. Lopes.
They say Mrs. Lopes, and they always say, mention the parrot.
Quite a local character.
And that's how she met my father, because my father, being a seaman,
he was in and out of Cardiff.
I have a discharge book of my father's, which was a continuation of a discharge book.
And the first date in that discharge book was 1902.
So obviously he must have been back and forth on the ships before 1902, you know,
which I found to be very interesting, you know.
Anyway, they met, they got married, and they settled down in Sapphire Street,
34 Sapphire Street, and that's where the family home.
That was the family home.
We did move once to Loudoun Square.
And that would be how long in terms of distance from one to another?
This was not a...
Oh no, it was only about 300, 400 yards.
I was about to say.
It was, I'd say, two streets away.
Two streets away, that sounds right.
We only stayed there for one night, that whole night,
and we could move back down into our old family home.
For what reasons, I don't know, because I was only speaking.
No, no, that's how interesting.
But that's where my parents, they were from the island of Santa Clara.
Right. And of course, the Bute Island community had a Cape Verde society.
Tell us a bit about that.
Society, well, the society was formed in 1987.
Right.
And that was the year that the Cape Verdes had their independence from Portugal.
Wow.
In July 5th, 1987.
As late as that, that's incredible when you think about it, isn't it?
Yeah.
And have you had a chance to ever visit?
I have not visited.
Unfortunately, I have not visited.
My son has been.
Right. And what did he report back?
What did he make of it?
Well, he went, because now the islands are being tourist, made for tourists now.
Yeah.
So the island he went to, which was Boa Vista, it's all tourist, you know.
Right, right. Tourist.
I've said, if you want to go, is to go to St. Vincent itself,
because that is not the island of St. Vincent.
Absolutely.
Mindello is the capital of St. Vincent.
It's not the capital of the Cape Verde Islands.
Interesting.
And the capital of Cape Verde Islands is on Santiago, a place called Praia.
Well, I've learned a lot about geography in a short period of time there.
It's the capital. That's where the government is seated.
Got it. Got it. Got it.
Returning to Cardiff Carnival, obviously you've been on the swicker board of management
for a very long time and always been incredibly supportive and always been positive.
And I have to say for the record, of course, you know, this is an audio interview,
but once again, Ray is the most smartly dressed man in team swicker.
He's managed to do that since we first met in 1991.
I hate to add that whilst I'm not looking too scruffy, I...
No, no, no, no.
He's always been the smartest dresser in the team.
Well, and that, as I say, and that goes back to the Cape Verde...
the Cape Verde community.
The men, the seamen, when they're on the ship, fair enough, they're in their working clothes.
But when they come aboard, come ashore, they dress.
They dress.
And that's where it's... that's basically where it's...
Well, you're carrying on the tradition, I have to say.
I'm very proud to do so.
No, absolutely.
Even though I do sometimes, people do keep mentioning the fact that,
oh, you're looking smart.
It's because you are looking smart.
As I say, I tell them, I said, I can't do nothing else.
That's the way I was brought up and that's the way I am.
So you've got to take me, take it or leave it.
It's a good look, yeah, man.
You're not going to have, Ray, tracky bottoms, not in this...
No.
Your face has a sense of it.
Nothing is tracky bottoms.
Are the right people?
No, absolutely.
So you've seen many, many carnivals, Newtown carnivals, Cardiff carnivals.
Are there any particular costumes or moments or music or...
What sticks in the memory?
What sort of highlights would you like to just...
What sticks in my memory is the fact that it was the West Indian music.
Trinidad, Calypsos, Reggae, Calypsos more so than...
At the beginning, Calypsos was the...
That was the thing.
And then Reggae, because my sister, one of my sisters,
she married a Trinidadian and lived over in Trinidad.
Wow. Port of Spain.
Well, San Fernando.
And the train is still there.
The last train is still there, is it?
It is still there, yes.
And that's what always sticks in my mind.
When you say carnival, I automatically can hear that music going.
Yes, absolutely.
I remember only thinking, was there a period when she came over to Cardiff
and she saw the carnival?
Yes.
What was her impression of what we were doing in Cardiff?
She was comparing it to the carnival in Trinidad and Port of Spain.
Which is one of the greatest carnivals in the world.
And she said it was all right, but she said it doesn't come up to what we're doing in Port of Spain.
I was in San Fernando, you know.
No, no, no.
She enjoyed it.
Absolutely.
She enjoyed it, but...
No, she didn't quite...
She enjoyed it.
I think she said it just to be polite.
So you don't...
I'm not knocking the carnival as much.
Sheer scale of what happens in Trinidad.
It's amazing.
I wish I could have been over there, but I wish I could have been over there
while the carnival is being prepared because that's...
Yes, the whole carnival season in the West Indies, particularly in Trinidad, as you say.
The home of the mask.
Yes.
At this point, I'd like to wind up proceedings and say, for the record and for posterity,
many thanks for the interview.
But equally, it's not a bankable honour and it's largely invisible,
but I wish to make the award of Carnival Hero to Ray Celestiano.
I'd like to thank him for all his help and support and goodwill over many, many years.
Once again, Ray, you're a carnival hero.
Thank you very much indeed.
Thank you very much.